NATO & Coalitions

NATO and coalitions have clearly held a critical role in supporting Ukraine. 

Individual NATO member countries are sending weapons, ammunition and many types of light and heavy military equipment, including anti-tank and air defense systems, howitzers, drones and tanks. To date, NATO Allies have provided billions of euros' worth of military equipment to Ukraine. Source: NATO(opens in a new tab) 

Working with European partners and Ukraine, the United States also launched the Ukraine Defense Contact Group—a coalition of 50 partner nations that has enhanced our coordination of security assistance deliveries to help the people of Ukraine as they continue to defend themselves against Russia’s unjust and unprovoked assault. Read more here: The United States White House


There was an expectation in the strategic community here in the United States, as well as probably a lot of capitals in Europe, that the coalition would not have a lot of strength. That maybe the U.S. would step up and a handful of European partners, but that ultimately Europe would buckle and we would not be successful in putting together the kind of coalition.

Now a year into it. We have north of 50 countries that are contributing in some way Ukraine's defense.

- Counselor Derek Chollet

Munitions

Weapons and supplies have been provided to the Ukraine in billions of dollars by EU countries, the US, and other allies. We've included a breakdown of the largest donors of military aid below. Also provided below is a visual glossary highlighting referenced military equipment.

Largest donors of military aid to Ukraine

Commitments made by donors for arms and equipment, 24 Jan 2022 to 15 Jan 2023


So right now, the things that are at the very top of the list:
1) Air Defense, because you've got to keep the Ukrainians in the game and keep the Russian Air Force and missile arsenal at bay.
2) Artillery because of the nature of the conflict in the East and the South.
3) Mechanized and armored systems.
And that's exactly what we're prioritizing in our various packages.

- Undersecretary Colin Kahl

Ammunition: 155 mm shells
lQSN-Mclnbp-Z9a1.jpg
Cost: one Excalibur shell is estimated at more than $110,000 USD. 

The 155 mm shell is one of the most often-requested and supplied items. The rounds are used in howitzer systems and have proven critical to Ukraine’s fight. The 155 mm shells allow the Ukrainians to hit Russian targets up to 20 miles (32 kilometers) away with a highly explosive munition.

Source: https://www.pbs.org/newshour/nation/long-war-in-ukraine-highlights-need-for-u-s-army-to-modernize-ammo-production(opens in a new tab)

155 mm artillery shells are packed for shipping at the Scranton Army Ammunition Plant in Scranton, Pennsylvania, Feb. 16, 2023. Photo by Brendan McDermid/REUTERS

Artillery: Patriot Batteries
_bJkNhjCFRqZbZRO-PatriotBattery.jpg
Cost: $1.1 billion 

A Patriot is a mobile surface-to-air missile and antiballistic missile system that can shoot down incoming missiles before they hit their intended targets. Patriot batteries can also shoot down aircraft. Mounted on trucks, to be moved around at will, each system is capable of holding four missile interceptors.

A patriot battery costs a billion dollars and the interceptors for them are extraordinarily expensive. So would it have been better for us to give a patriot battery on day 1 of the war that takes 2 or 3 months to train on, get into the country and can defend one strategic site against a particular set of threats? Or spend that same billion dollars on the stinger missiles that actually helped defeat the Russians from being able to seize those key airports around Kiev.

-Undersecretary of Defense for Policy Colin Kahl on prioritization  

Air-defense: Man-portable air-defense system (MANPADS or MPADS)
7ibF5cuM0QAM9WLA-JavelinAntiTankMissile.jpg
Cost: Stingers as one example, recent May 2022 U.S contract of up to 1,468 Stingers worth up to $687 million with options added in. 

Man-portable air-defense systems (MANPADS or MPADS) are portable surface-to-air missiles. They are guided weapons and are a threat to low-flying aircraft, especially helicopters.

Undersecretary of Defense for Policy Colin Kahl and Counselor to the Secretary of State Derek Chollet reference Stingers, Anti-tank guided missiles, and Javelin Anti-tank missiles.

Armored fighting vehicles: Leopard 2
gdaQsQ602km4m06G-Leopard2.jpeg
Cost: $11 million each (per Germany's agreements)

In the months which followed the Russian invasion, NATO preferred member countries to supply Ukraine with tanks which had been in use in the former Warsaw Pact,

Ukraine's armed forces know how to operate them, and how to maintain them, and had a lot spare parts for them.

"extraordinarily expensive, require training, and can really be hard to maintain"  

-Undersecretary of Defense for Policy Colin Kahl


